Seven chakras
In the philosophy of the seven chakras there are correspondences to the five elements as shared by both Hinduism and Buddhism as well as two other elements:
Sahasrara (Crown): Time/Space
Ajña (Third Eye): Light/Dark
Vishuddhi (Throat): Ether/Sound
Anahata (Heart): Air
Manipura (Navel): Fire
Svadhisthana (Sacral): Water
Muladhara (Root): Earth
Description of the chakras

Tantric chakras
Sahasrara
Ajna
Vishuddha
Anahata
Manipura
Swadhisthana
Muladhara
Bindu
David Gordon White traces the modern popularity of the seven chakra system to Arthur Avalon's The Serpent Power, which was Avalon's translation of a late work, the Satcakranirupana.[8] Below is a description of the seven chakras, with various associations.
Sahasrara: The Crown Chakra

Sahasrara, which means 1000 petalled lotus, is generally considered to be the chakra of pure consciousness, within which there is neither object nor subject. When the female kundalini Shakti energy rises to this point, it unites with the male Shiva energy, and a state of liberating samadhi is attained. Symbolized by a lotus with one thousand multi-coloured petals, it is located either at the crown of the head, or above the crown of the head. Sahasrara is represented by the colour white and it involves such issues as inner wisdom and the death of the body.
Its role may be envisioned somewhat similarly to that of the pituitary gland, which secretes hormones to communicate to the rest of the endocrine system and also connects to the central nervous system via the hypothalamus. According to author Gary Osborn, the thalamus is thought to have a key role in the physical basis of consciousness and is the 'Bridal Chamber' mentioned in the Gnostic scriptures. Sahasrara's inner aspect deals with the release of karma, physical action with meditation, mental action with universal consciousness and unity, and emotional action with "beingness."[34]
In Tibetan buddhism, the point at the crown of the head is represented by a white circle, with 33 downward pointing petals. It is of primary importance in the performance of phowa, or consciousness projection after death, in order to obtain rebirth in a Pure Land. Within this chakra is contained the White drop, or Bodhicitta, which is the essence of masculine energy.
Ajna: The Brow Chakra

Ajna is symbolised by a lotus with two petals, and corresponds to the colours violet, indigo or deep blue, though it is traditionally described as white. It is at this point that the two side nadis Ida and Pingala are said to terminate and merge with the central channel Sushumna, signifying the end of duality. The seed syllable for this chakra is the syllable OM, and the presiding deity is Ardhanarishvara, who is a half male, half female Shiva/Shakti. The Shakti goddess of Ajna is called Hakini.
Ajna (along with Bindu), is known as the third eye chakra and is linked to the pineal gland which may inform a model of its envisioning. The pineal gland is a light sensitive gland that produces the hormone melatonin which regulates sleep and waking up. Ajna's key issues involve balancing the higher and lower selves and trusting inner guidance. Ajna's inner aspect relates to the access of intuition. Mentally, Ajna deals with visual consciousness. Emotionally, Ajna deals with clarity on an intuitive level.[35] (Note: some[who?] believe that the pineal and pituitary glands should be exchanged in their relationship to the Crown and Brow chakras, based on the description in Arthur Avalon's book on kundalini called Serpent Power or empirical research.)
In Tibetan Buddhism, this point is actually the end of the central channel, since the central channel rises up from the sexual organ to the crown of the head, and then curves over the head and down to the third eye. While the central channel finishes here, the two side channels continue down to the two nostrils.
Vishuddha: The Throat Chakra

Vishuddha (also Vishuddhi) is depicted as a silver crescent within a white circle, with 16 light or pale blue, or turquoise petals. The seed mantra is Ham, and the residing deity is Panchavaktra shiva, with 5 heads and 4 arms, and the Shakti is Shakini.
Vishuddha may be understood as relating to communication and growth through expression. This chakra is paralleled to the thyroid, a gland that is also in the throat and which produces thyroid hormone, responsible for growth and maturation. Physically, Vishuddha governs communication, emotionally it governs independence, mentally it governs fluent thought, and spiritually, it governs a sense of security.[36] In Tibetan buddhism, this chakra is red, with 16 upward pointing petals. It plays an important role in Dream Yoga, the art of lucid dreaming.
Anahata: The Heart Chakra

Anahata, or Anahata-puri, or padma-sundara is symbolised by a circular flower with twelve green petals. (See also heartmind.) Within it is a yantra of two intersecting triangles, forming a hexagram, symbolising a union of the male and female. The seed mantra is Yam, the presiding deity is Ishana Rudra Shiva, and the Shakti is Kakini.
Anahata is related to the thymus, located in the chest. The thymus is an element of the immune system as well as being part of the endocrine system. It is the site of maturation of the T cells responsible for fending off disease and may be adversely affected by stress. Anahata is related to the colours green or pink. Key issues involving Anahata involve complex emotions, compassion, tenderness, unconditional love, equilibrium, rejection and well-being. Physically Anahata governs circulation, emotionally it governs unconditional love for the self and others, mentally it governs passion, and spiritually it governs devotion.[37]
In Tibetan Buddhism, this centre is extremely important, as being the home of the indestructible red/white drop, which carries our consciousness to our next lives. It is described as being white, circular, with eight downward pointing petals, and the seed syllable Hum inside. During mantra recitation in the lower tantras, a flame is imagined inside of the heart, from which the mantra rings out. Within the higher tantras, this chakra is very important for realising the Clear Light.
Manipura: The Solar Plexus Chakra

Manipura or manipuraka is symbolised by a downward pointing triangle with ten petals, along with the color yellow. The seed syllable is Ram, and the presiding deity is Braddha Rudra, with Lakini as the Shakti.
Manipura is related to the metabolic and digestive systems. Manipura is believed to correspond to Islets of Langerhans,[38] which are groups of cells in the pancreas, as well as the outer adrenal glands and the adrenal cortex. These play a valuable role in digestion, the conversion of food matter into energy for the body. The colour that corresponds to Manipura is yellow. Key issues governed by Manipura are issues of personal power, fear, anxiety, opinion-formation, introversion, and transition from simple or base emotions to complex. Physically, Manipura governs digestion, mentally it governs personal power, emotionally it governs expansiveness, and spiritually, all matters of growth.[39]
Swadhisthana: The Sacral Chakra

Swadhisthana, Svadisthana or adhishthana is symbolised by a white lotus within which is a crescent moon, with six vermillion, or orange petals. The seed mantra is Vam, and the presiding deity is Brahma, with the Shakti being Rakini (or Chakini). The animal associated is the crocodile of Varuna.
The Sacral Chakra is located in the sacrum (hence the name) and is considered to correspond to the testes or the ovaries that produce the various sex hormones involved in the reproductive cycle. Swadisthana is also considered to be related to, more generally, the genitourinary system and the adrenals. The key issues involving Swadisthana are relationships, violence, addictions, basic emotional needs, and pleasure. Physically, Swadisthana governs reproduction, mentally it governs creativity, emotionally it governs joy, and spiritually it governs enthusiasm.[40]
Muladhara: The Root Chakra

Muladhara or root chakra is symbolised by a lotus with four petals and the color red. This center is located at the base of the spine in the coccygeal region. It is said to relate to the gonads and the adrenal medulla, responsible for the fight-or-flight response when survival is under threat.
Muladhara is related to instinct, security, survival and also to basic human potentiality. Physically, Muladhara governs sexuality, mentally it governs stability, emotionally it governs sensuality, and spiritually it governs a sense of security.[41] Muladhara has a relation to the sense of smell.[42]
This chakra is where the three main nadis separate and begin their upward movement. Dormant Kundalini rests here, wrapped three and a half times around the black Svayambhu linga, the lowest of three obstructions to her full rising (also known as knots or granthis).[43] It is the seat of the red bindu, the female drop (which in Tibetan vajrayana is located at the navel chakra).[clarification needed]
The seed syllable is Lam (pronounced lum), the deity is Ganesh,[citation needed] and the Shakti is Dakini.[44] The associated animal is the elephant.[45]
Lower chakras
There are said to be a series of seven chakras below muladhara going down the leg,[46] corresponding the base animal instincts, and to the Hindu underworld patala. They are called atala, vitala, sutala, talatala, rasatala, mahatala and patala.
Atala
This chakra is located in the hips, it governs fear and lust. The opposing attribute to balance this chakra is governed by the right to be sexual.
Vitala
Located in the thighs, it governs anger and resentment. The opposing attribute to balance this chakra is forgiveness.
Sutala
Located in the knees, it governs jealousy. The opposing attribute to balance this chakra is the right to be self-confident.
Talatala
Translated as 'under the bottom level', it is located in the calves, and it is a state of prolonged confusion and instinctive wilfulness. The opposing attribute to balance this chakra is the right to be conscious.
Rasatala
Located in the ankles, it is the centre of selfishness and pure animal nature. The opposing attribute to balance this chakra is the right to be charitable.
Mahatala
Located in the feet, this is the dark realm 'without conscience', and inner blindness. The opposing attribute to balance this chakra is the right to be expansive and unimpeded.
Patala
Located in the soles of the feet, this is the realm of malice, murder, torture and hatred, and in Hindu mythology it borders on the realm of Naraka, or Hell. The opposing attribute to balance this chakra is the right to be empathetic and understanding.
Others
There are said to be 21 minor chakras which are reflected points of the major chakras.[47] These 21 are further grouped into 10 bilateral minor chakras that correspond to the foot, hand, knee, elbow, groin, clavicular, navel, shoulder and ear. The spleen may also be classified as a minor chakra by some authorities despite not having an associated coupled minor chakra.
See also

Activating Your Seven Chakras
  
 	
 	
Stimulating your spinning wheels of light will bring viatlity to your inner chi.

CHAKRA is a Sanskrit word that means “wheel.” Those who can see them describe chakras as spinning wheels of light that glow and spread outwards. The magnificence of the radiating colours reflects the strength of a person’s inner chi, the clarity of one’s thoughts and the purity of one’s attitudes. Chakras are concentrations of focused energy that have much mental and spiritual power. When we activate and balance our chakras, we stimulate the optimum release of powerful energies, which give rise to feelings of well being, good health and enhanced mental clarity.

Within our bodies we have focal points of energy that we use consciously or unconsciously all the time so they affect our attitudes, our response to the world and our potential for happiness and good health. These focal points are our Chakras, and the well being of each of our seven Chakras affects our behaviour and attitudes. Consciously tuning into them, meditating on them and then arousing and balancing them are thus excellent for making us feel centered.    

When our chakras are unhealthy, blocked or unbalanced, they lead us to make unwise decisions, and makes us unhappy, depressed and indecisive. Chakras are a core belief of many meditative practices, spiritual and religious, and have been incorporated into many New Age practices. The chakra system was first developed in India in the Middle Ages.     

Ideally, all the chakras should be active and spinning at a similar rate to each other. Most of us however have some chakras that are overactive and others that are closed down or under -active so they need to be stimulated.     

Chakras can be stimulated in different ways. At the highest levels of stimulation, highly attained yogics use meditative equipoises to do so. Their methods reflect their high levels of mental and spiritual attainments. These are known as siddhic powers, the realization of which require years of meditative retreat to perfect. Powerful and usually secret methods for arousing the chakras are said to be part of Hindu and Tibetan Chakra systems. These methods are not readily available and can usually only be learnt when one is taken under the wing of a high practitioner, usually a holy man, high lama or realized guru.    

Ordinary folk like us can try using simple calm-abiding meditation and other visualization techniques to achieve some small stimulation of our chakra centers. What we can achieve is of course nothing compared to the siddhic powers of the yogics, but however small our attainment, it nevertheless brings enormous health and spiritually- awakening benefits. What we can do is to focus our conscious awareness onto the seven chakra points located at different vital places of the body. 

In recent years, New Age practitioners have increasingly used flower essences, crystals and lights to awaken chakra points with some degree of success in improving health and reducing stress levels. Stimulating chakra points can also dissolve blockages that subvert the flow of inner chi, helping the mind to release and dissolve mental pressure and negative emotions.     

Advocates of Chakra arousal and balancing explain that unless this is done, one’s mind and emotions can create resistance within the inner systems of the body so that eventually, blockages assume physical proportions, lodging in whichever physical area of the body is most vulnerable. This is what gives rise to disease and illness. Chakra balancing dissolves blockages before they become physical illnesses.

Activating the Seven Chakra Points

 	 CHAKRA	LOCATION 
PURPOSE OF AROUSING THE CHAKRA 
COLOUR TO VISUALIZE * 
 1	 First	 Base of spine	 Grounding and stabilizing	 Black
 2	 Second	 Genital area	 Sexuality	Dark Red 
 3	 Third	 Novel or solar plexus area
 Personal power and emotional release
 Yellow
 4	 Fourth	 Heart	 Promotes mental clarity
 Blue
 5	 Fifth	 Throat	 Empowers your speech
 Red
 6	 Sixth	 Brow between eyes
 Generates inner wisdom
 Lavender
 7	 Seventh	 Crown of head
 Wholeness & physical well being
 White
* The method is to visualize coloured light at the chakra area, but you can also use coloured crystals to activate the chakra.
Place the crystals on the point while lying down flat on your back, feeling relaxed, and visualize coloured light radiating outwards.
Crystals, being symmetrical in their molecular structure, radiate energy in a consistent and steady manner. So they are excellent
for creating a healing flow around the chakras.Each chakra responds to a special colour, and to crystals of corresponding
colours that are placed at the chakra point.


1. First Chakra (Base of Spine)

The first chakra represents our bodies’ relationship with the material world. It grounds us in physical existence. When activated and balanced, its chi energy helps us blend the physical with the spiritual, and eliminates all that we do not need for growth. When this chakra is stagnant, we lack self-confidence and fear life, feel like victims, withdraw from physical reality, and thus act selfishly. Physical symptoms can include problems with feet, legs or the lower back.

Gemstones associated with the first chakra:

Black tourmaline : This is a protective stone, which is excellent when you feel threatened for whatever reason. 
Hematite : This stone helps you establish protective boundaries when you feel others are intruding into your life. 
Smoky quartz : This is the lightest of the dark stones and helps blend the energies of the first and seventh chakras. 
Tiger’s eye : This stone helps you feel secure and increases confidence levels. 


2. Second Chakra (Genital Area)

 This chakra is directly related to sexually aroused energy flow, as expressed in the flow of blood, and with the energies of creativity. It is deeply connected to the five physical senses. When it is unblocked, people feel fully alive, energetic, spontaneous, guilt-free and they also love their bodies. When it is unbalanced, reproductive organ diseases, joint stiffness and various blood disorders could result.

Gemstones in line with the second chakra:

Carnelian : This is associated with creativity and decision-making. 
Ruby or Rubelite : The stone of passion. This stone greatly enhances sensory awareness. 
Red Jasper : This stone connects you to the auras. 
Red Garnet : This stone encourages patience and a calmness of attitude.


3. Third Chakra (Navel and Solar Plexus Area) 


This is the chakra of personal and material power, with an emphasis on mastery in the physical realm, especially the ability to manifest one’s hopes and dreams. It relates to expressing of one’s unique individuality. When it is unblocked and activated, you feel supremely self-confident, have a clear sense of purpose, and pursue ambitions that others consider impossible. Imbalances manifest as lack of self-confidence, insecurity about money and may also result in aggressive behaviour and using the one’s of power to dominate others. Physical symptoms manifest as stomach type disorders.

Gemstones in line with the third chakra:

Citrine : This stone manifests abundance and has a calming effect, especially on emotions such as anger and stress.
Golden Calcite : This stone integrates energies related to personal empowerment, such as relationships and business.Rutilated Quartz : This stone adds enhanced energy to dreams.
Pyrite : This stone encourages the rise of creative ideas, which bring abundance.
Golden Topaz : Releases conditions that inhibit personal growth.




4. Fourth Chakra (Heart Area) 


This chakra relates to mental clarity and clear sightedness of goals. It also opens our minds to loving kindness. When it is unblocked, we give love unconditionally and attract people who give us clarity of purpose. When it is blocked, we feel a lack of love and mental stability as keenly as those with third-chakra blockages feel a lack of material security. Heart conditions are the most common physical symptoms.

Gemstones associated with the fourth chakra:

Sapphires : Eases old, limiting beliefs (especially those based on fear) from the mind, so that new ideas can flourish.
Blue Topaz : Relates most directly to the spiritual aspects of love. It also opens the creative elements of the heart and adds emotional depth to one’s being. 
Lapis Lazuli : Calms the mind and relieves mental stress. 
Aquamarines : Release old and hurtful emotional patterns so the heart can be open to receive and give unconditional love.


5. Fifth Chakra (Throat Area) 


This chakra governs communication and speech. When activated, we communicate effectively with others in both written and verbal form. This includes being able to constructively influence others for the collective good. When it is blocked, communication is difficult or impossible. No one listens to you or what you say. Usually there can be more physical blockages associated with the fifth chakra than with any other. These can include excessive eating and drinking (good ways to keep the throat busy while preventing communication) and a range of respiratory diseases.

Gemstones associated with the sixth chakra:

Rubies : This stone helps us communicate with deities and divine beings and aids in long-distance communication. It also dissolves anger.
Rose Quartz : Enables our speech to have a calming effect on others. Makes us express ourselves in a tranquil way.
Rubelite : This stone enables us to communicate fearlessly that which we know to be true, and also stimulates creativity. It encourages the growth of self-confidence in personal expression.



6. Sixth Chakra (Between Eyebrows) 


Some people regard this as the place of our third eye, the psychic center of our being. When unblocked, it is the source of our inner wisdom and intuitive powers. Here is where we must focus our concentration if we want to develop our psychic abilities. This chakra is particularly related to the fear of our imagination, dreams and “irrational” intuitions. Physical symptoms of blockage include migraine, insomnia and anxiety. 

Gemstones associated with the sixth chakra:

Amethyst : Known as nature’s tranquilizer, this stone helps us sleep peacefully and encourages us to have prophetic dreams. 
Azurite : Helps us focus on negative beliefs and helps dissolve them. 
Kunzite : This stone dissolve fears, both known and unknown. 
Lapis : Helps us discover hidden beliefs within us and brings them to the surface. 
Sodalite : Brings stability when one is emotionally or mentally confused. 


7. Seventh Chakra (Crown of the Head) 


The seventh chakra directly connects us to the highest self within us. When it is balanced, we connect directly with the universe, dissolve the illusion that we are separate from other humans and other forms of life, and we appreciate our uniqueness and understand the true nature of reality. When it is blocked, we feel uncomfortable in our own skin, feeling alone and afraid of death and dying.

Stones associated with the seventh chakra:

Clear Quartz Crystal : There are many forms of clear quartz. Crystal clusters help us view what happens in our lives from the soul perspective, and promotes calmness and serenity even when life seems difficult. Crystal points are good for dissolving chakra blockages, enabling us to see clearly.  


Chakra balancing meditation

Choose one of the gemstones for each chakra. It is a good idea to activate all seven chakras, as this balances them. You can then arouse any one separately. Lie down and place each stone on the appropriate location. Inhale deeply, and as you inhale, imagine your breath coming up through the soles of your feet and filling your body as it rises to the top of your head. As you exhale, imagine it travelling back down your body and exiting through the soles of your feet. After you’ve practiced this a while, you may want to visualize the colour associated with each chakra as the breath travels through the related part of the body.
    
If you are working on a particular chakra, you may want to create a positive thought associated with it. For instance, a heart chakra mental thought can be “I receive the empowerment of unconditional love. My mind is mentally clear and bright.” Meditate on this thought and visualize yourself flooded with the blue light that radiates outwards from your heart chakra.
    
Chakra focus should be a relaxing way to meditate. As you continue to practice it, you will find yourself more attuned to your own subtle inner energies. You will become more aware of imbalances before they express themselves physically.
